# WHAT IS VIRTUALIZATION?

- One computer does job of multiple computers
- We are not about multitasking, we're talking about multi os
- One computer can run multiple OS at the same time parallely
- That was not the case before virtualization

## LIFE BEFORE VIRTUALIZATION
- To run App/Services like Tomcat, apache httpd, mysql databases we need Servers
- In that time the only option was physical computers (Servers in Datacenter)
- As always, the idea is one main service-one server
- And this is for isolation.
- So if your database server is running, you don't want to run a web server in the same machine, or web service in the same computer.
- This will be like puuting all your eggs in one basket
- Servers are always over-provisioned. that means if we need 8GB of RAM we will go for 12GB of RAM.
- IT team will always over-provision servers.
- Server resources are mostly under-utilized
- You'll say if it's under-utilized, then why is it over-provisioned?
- Well the IT team will always go for extra just in case. So they don't run out of resources.
- But all this results in huge capital expenditure and operational expenditure
- We are talking about physical servers here, you have to procure it, statck it, install OS and maintain it.
- So if you have 10 service ina project, you need 10 servers minimum and for high availability, minimum you need 20, and definately more than that.
- Then came VMware

## WHAT IS VIRTUALIZATION?
- With the concept of virtualization, VMware created tools which could allow one computer to run multiple operating systems.
- And that was how we can isolate.
- So instead of running multiple main service in one computer, we ran multiple OS in the computer and run all services on top of that.
- So they'll be isolated
- Anf if you're thinking again, isn't it the problem of having all your eggs in one basket?
- These physical computers can be clustered together so you can distribute your virtual machines
- virtualization partitions your physical resources into virtual resources
- with virtualization you can create multiple virtual computers in the physical machine
- this virtual computers are isolated from each other because they have their own OS
- and we're talking about server virtualization (most common virtualization)
- but there are other kinds of virtualization
    - Network virtualization
    - Storage virtualization

## HOW IT LOOKS
- We have the hardware (physical computer)
- on top of that you'll have a tool called a HPERVISOR software
- on that you can create virtual machines
- each virtual machine having its own operating system
- image at
```
visualpath.in/devopstutorials/devops
```
- and you can run your main service (application) in this OS
- so they are isolated from each other

## TERMINOLOGIES
### 1. HOST OS
- This is the operating system of the physical computer

### 2. GUEST OS
- the operating system of the virtual machine
- virtual machines are also referred to sometimes as GUEST machine

### 3. VM
- Short for virtual machines

### 4. SNAPSHOT
- This is a way of taking back up of the virtual machine
- these virtual machines are really just set of files 
- so which can be backed up very easily

### 5. HYPERVISOR
- The tool/software that let us to do or create virtual machines.
- hypervisors enable virtualization

## TYPES OF HYPERVISORS
Ther are 2 types
### 1. TYPE 1
- Also called bare metal hypervisor
- it runs directly on the physical computer like an operating system
- just like you have Windows 1o or MacOS, you will have hypervisors installed on the physical machine
- now this is only for production and it won't let you use the computer for other purposes
- TYPE 1 hypervisor can be clustered together
- so you can distribute your VM on the cluster of the hypervisor
- so if one of the hypervisors goes down the other can take over
- Example 
    - VMware ESXi
    - Zen Hypervisor

### 2. TYPE 2
- It runs as a software which you can install on any computer
- for learning and testing purposes (not for production)
- Example
    - Oracle VM VirtualBox
    - VMware Server etc

image for the two type of hypervisor at
```
visualpath.in/devopstutorials/devops
```
There's an hypervisor called Hyper-V from Microsoft, and that can be easily confused as a TYPE 2 hyperviso, but it is a TYPE 1 hypervisor

