# GIT TAGS, SEMANTICS, VERSIONING AND MORE

## GIT TAGS FOR SEMANTIC VERSIONING
Almost every software today use semantic versioning. Most software versions are in the format
```
Version 1.91.1
```

These are 3 numbers separated by dot (.)

So this is the format

```
Major.Minor.Patch
```

The PATCH number indicates that there's a bug fix. A simple slight improvement from the previous version.

The MINOR number indicates that there's a new feature added, or some improvements was done in the software.

The MAJOR number indicates major changes, and it'll be backward incompatible

### TAG A COMMIT
```
$ git tag [TAG NAME] [COMMIT ID]
```
The tag name will be the semantic versioning.
If you don't give the commit ID, the current commit ID it will tag.
In git, the tag simply means a name to a commit. Another name to the same commit.

git show tag will show you all of the tags
```
$ git show [TAG NAME]
```

### ANNOTATED TAGS

```
$ git tag -a [TAG NAME] -m "[MESSAGE]" [COMMIT ID]

#Example
$ git tag -a v2.1.6 -m "Release for something"
```
The tag name will be the semantic versioning.

### PUSH TAGS
Push tags to remote repository like github
```
$ git push origin tag [TAG NAME]

#Push all the tags
$ git push --tags
```

### EXERCISES

Login to you github account. Visit the repository
```
https://github.com/hkcoder/vprofile-project
```

If you go to **Tags**, you will see some the tags created. Go back to the repository and fork it, uncheck **Copy the main branch only**, Then click **Create fork**. You can the repository **proton**

After forking clone the repository in VSCode.

Switch to branch **atom** in VSCode

Click on the README.md file and make slight changes e.g
```
...
#####
- JDK 21
```

Commit in VSCode (message = "read file changes"). Click the check mark icon to accept commit message.

### Open Git Bash in VSCode

See all tags
```
$ git tag
```

See a tag detail
```
$ git show v2.0.0
```

Press <kbd>q</kbd> to quit

So the last tag was **v3.5.2**, se we'll give the command below (assuming we made a bug fix, so we change the bug version from 2 to 3)
```
$ git tag -a v3.5.3 -m "Release 3.5.3"
```

Run **git tag** again and you should see the next version
```
$ git tag
```

After this we need to sync the changes to the remote repository, but for that we need to login to a github account from VSCode, so VSCode can push the changes.

### LOGIN TO GITHUB ACCOUNT USING VSCODE AND SYNC CHANGES TO REMOTE REPO
- Install extension **GitHub Pull Requests**
- After installing the icon will show up on the left bar. Click on the icon then click **Sign in** 
- Afer you sign in, then **Sync Changes** fro VSCode (This will push all the changes but the tags are not pushed.)
- To push tags as well, click on the settings icon on the left tab, click **Commad pallete**, search for "git push", then click **Git: Push (Follow Tags)** (This will push the commit and also the tags with it)
- Go to your repository and click on **Tags**, and you should see the tag you created
- You can also mark a tag as release. Click **Releases** select the branch and the tag, fill the form and click **Publish releas** 
