# SETUP GITHUP COPILOT

Github copilot is an AI tool from github.

It gets integrated with your code editors like VSCode and it will be your assistant in developing your code.

It's trained on billions of lines of public code, and that is where it derives its intelligence from.

### HOW GITHUB COPILOT HELPS DEVELOPERS IN CODING

1. **CODE SUGGESTION**: for fater coding and inproved efficiency

2. **INLINE DOCUMENTATION**: provides context directly within your code

3. **AUTO-COMPLETION**: speeds up coding by predicting your next steps


### SETUP AND INTEGRATE COPILOT WITH VSCODE

- Install **GitHub Copilot** extension on VSCode
- Make sure your github account is logged in on your default browser.
- You sould see the github copilot icon on the bottom right that says **Signed out**, click on it and then click **Sign in to use Copilot** 
- After signing in. click on the copilot icon at the top, beside the search bar, and click **Open Chat**, to chat with it.
- Note that this is a free trial. If the click the copilot icon at the bottom right, you should see the **Code completion** and **Chat messages** percentage you've used. So use it wisely.
- Copilot has so many agents, to accsess the agents we need to do <kbd>@</kbd> in the the chatbox, and the agents will come up. Some of the agents include @github, @termimal, @vscode, etc
- There are commands provided by github taht you can use on line(s) of code by hightlighting the code then right click and click **Modify using Copilot** (You can also do <kbd>ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>i</kbd> or <kbd>command</kbd> + <kbd>i</kbd>). A chatbox will come up, to access the commands all you have to do is press <kbd>/</kbd>. The commands include /explain, /fix, /edit, etc.
