# VAGRANT SYNC DIRECTORIES

In our VM folder we have this hidden folder **.vagrant** 

In this hidden folder, we have VM specific inforation like
- **private_key** file: the login key. When you do **vagrant ssh**, this is the key that's used to login to the VM. 

If you run the VM using **vagrant up**. When the VM comes up, you see this information

```
default: C:/vagrant-vms/centos => /vagrant
```

You see two path
1. host machine path **C:/vagrant-vms/centos**
2. guest machine path **/vagrant**

From virtualization introduction, remember we have host machine and guest machine.
- **Host machine** is my computer, my laptop and 
- **Guest machine** is VM coming up from this centos folder

Let's see how this works. Login to the VM, and swith to root user
```
$ vagrant ssh

$ sudo -i
```

Now switch to the vagrant folder and list it's file
```
$ cd /vagrant

$ ls

Vagranfile

$ ls -a
.   ..  .vagrant    Vagrantfile
```

When we do **ls -a** we see the Vagrantfile and the hidden folder .vagrant.

Now if we create any files in this path **/vagrant** in our VM, those files will also appear in our **/c/vagrant-vms/centos/** folder
```
touch files{1..10}.sh
```

This files will also appear in our **/c/vagrant-vms/centos/** folder.

What's happening is the **/vagrant** folder seems to be a folder in the VM, but actually this a folder coming from the host machine, **/c/vagrant-vms/centos/** is actually synced with **/vagrant** folder in the VM

So whatever you do in **/vagrant** or **/c/vagrant-vms/centos/** will give the same effect.

So if you created the file from **/c/vagrant-vms/centos/** it will also be created on **/vagrant** because they are basically the same folder.

Now if we open the Vagrantfile of the centos VM we should see this line

```
config.vm.synced_folder "../data", "/vagrant_data"
```

**../data** is the host path, 
**/vagrant_data** is the guest path or VM path

i.e

```
config.vm.synced_folder "[HOST PATH]", "[GUEST PATH]"

Example
config.vm.synced_folder "./scripts", "/opt/scripts"
```

With this settings, you can create your own synced folder.

**/vagrant** of the VM is a default synced folder, but you can create yours as well.

You can map any folder from your host machine, to your guest machine.

In order for the settings to take effect, we need to reboot the VM.



