# PROVISIONING

Provisoning means executing commands when the OS comes up, or after the boot.

Provisoning is done only once when the OS comes up, or after the boot.

This is also called as BOOTSTRAPPING in general. In vagrant it's called VAGRANT PROVISONING

Make sure this lines are enabled in your Vagrantfile

```
config.vm.network "public_network"

config.vm.network "private_network", ip: "192.168.33.10"

config.vm.provision "shell", inline: <<-SHELL
    apt-get update
    apt-get install -y apache2
SHELL
```

**config.vm.provision "shell"** means provision on the shell, there are some other provisoner also in vagrant. Specifically it tells Vagrant to run a shell script when the VM is created or provisoned.

**<<** is an append input redirection

And inside **-SHELL SHELL** we will see commands, and these commands will come as input redirection on the **shell**.

In short if you want VM to execute commands you can just mention all the commands inside **-SHELL SHELL**.

The provision command will only run when we're just creating the VM.

```
config.vm.provision "shell", inline: <<-SHELL
    apt-get update
    apt-get install -y apache2
SHELL
```

After creating the VM, if you restart or power up your VM the provison script will not run.

If you want to run provisoning again after creating the VM, you can do
```
$ vagrant provision #OR

$ vagrant up --provision #OR

$ vagrant reload --provision
```

**vagrant provision** command is used when the VM is up, it will just run the provisioning script.

**vagrant up --provision** command is used when you want to power on the VM, and also run the provisioning script.

**vagrant reload --provision** command is used when you want to restart the VM and also run the provisioning script.


