# INTRODUCTION

### REASON FOR LEARNING GIT
1. You will be working with developers, when they make changes to their code, you are going to be responsible to fetch that code, build it, test it, and deploy it to the servers. In order to do all this you need to communicate with developers and you should understand the language they speak

2. Being a devops, you'll be writing lot of text based data like scripts, automation, code, and many other text related code or data. In order to do that you'll need to use regulary version control system.

## VERSION CONTROL SYSTEM

Back in the day before making changes to any file, you have to first create a copy of that file using timestamp, and create a backup just incase you break anything in that file you can revert back to the copy or backup file (e.g webdeploy.sh_15112025, webdeploy.sh_15112025.backup)

This will be a lot of work if many files are constantly updated by lot of people, we will endup with a lot copy and backup files.

This method is referred to as timestamp versioning.

A tool that can do all that and much more.

### WHAT IS VERSION CONTROL SYSTEM
- You can manage multiple versions of your of your document , programs, wbsite etc
- You can track history of all the files
- It has it's special kind of database that it use to keeps track of every changes that you do.

### WHY VCS?
#### For individual
- Gives you a time machine for going back to earler version of the file.
- Gives you great support for different versions (standalone, web app etc) of the same basic project

#### For working with team
- Many people will be working on the same code and committing to the same place, and 

#### Management of changes in file
- You can keep track of who made the change, when they made the change, and the reason for the change.
- So it allows people to work together.

### KINDS OF VERSION CONTROL SYSTEM
#### Localised VCS
- keeps local copies of the file
- It's for the individual (you). You have local copies of the files
- You have multiple versions of the same file

#### Centralised VCS
- There's a server and a client. 
- The server is the master repository which contains all of the version of the code.
- Clients will fetch the code, make the changes, and then push it back to the server.
- So the main copy will be with the server, and the client will have the working copy.

### EXAMPLES OF CENTRALIZED VCS
#### Subversion, CVS, Perforce, etc. 
- A central server repository (repo) holds the "official copy" of the code. 
- the server has the entire history of the repository
- You make "checkouts" of it to your local copy
- Checkout means pulling the code on to your system
- You make changes on your system
- Your changes are not versioned
- Once your changes are good you push it to the server, and the server will maintain the version.

#### DRAWBACKS TO LOCALISED AND CENTRALIZED VCS
- Both approaches have a single point of failure
- If you are working with a local copy, you have localised version control system, if your system fails, your code is gone.
- In centralized, there is a server, again a computer, if the server is not performing or working that particular time, you will not be able to do versioning
- So the Distributed Version Control System was introduced

### DISTRIBUTED VCS
- In the central vcs the server has the server has the repository and the client is going to checkin and checkout (push and pull)
- In the distributed vcs, everybody will have the full copy, every individual will have the repository.
- When you make changes you make changes to your local repository, when you're good you'll do all the versioning in your local resitory.
- When you're good, then you're going to sync your repository with the server repository.
- Even if the centralized or remote repository is down, you can still be working on your local system with your full copy
- Git is the biggest example of distributed version control system.
- Other examples are Mercurial, 
- In git you don't "checkout" from a central repo, you clone it (i.e you download the entire repository to your machine)
- And when you make changes, you push the changes or when someone else makes changes to the remote repository, you pull the changes.
- Your local repository is a complete copy of the everything on the remote server.
- Most of the operations are local. You do all the checkin (commit) in local repository
- The local repository keeps the version history, everything you have and when you're ready with your code, you can push the changes back to the server.or the remote repository

### WHAT IS GIT?
- Git is a distributed version control system
- Git provides speed. 
    - It support non-linear developent
    - It is fully distribted (Everybody has a full copy of the repo)
    - Able to handle large projects
- Git provides ease
    - Simple to use tools and commands
    - Cloud based remote repository

There are providers that gives you cloud based remote repository like you have Github, You only have other cloud providers like Bitbucket

From AWS you have git repositories like Codecommit, then you have it Azure, Google Cloud, 

### GIT CREATOR
- Created by Linus Torvalds, creator of Linux, in 2005.
    - Came out of Linux development community
    - Designed to do version control on Linux kernel