# WHAT IS CLOUD COMPUTING? 

Imagine a data center with many computers or servers running together to orovid compute resource to an organization or to it's branches. 

Now imagine all this computer are virtualized, or hypervisors are installed on them. So virtualization team can create virtual machines and allot it to the right individual. 

So if the employeea in the organization needs a VM or computer to do some computation, they will contact the virtualization team to provide them the compute resources. 

Virtualization team working with DC ops team will work around the clock to create, manage, and maintain these virtual machines or virtual storage as well.

So more bigger the company, more administration will required for the virtualized platform. So this is `Virtualization`, before `Cloud Computing` came in.

Now assume similar virtualized platforms, but instead of contacting virtualization team to provide virtual resources you have a self-help portal, a website or even command line to access that virtualized platform. So if you need a virtual machine, you can just login create a VM for yourself or even virtual storage or any virtual service for that matter. This is called as `Cloud Computing`. Accessing your virtualized resource over the network 


So now from anywhere you can connect to your cloud portal through APIs, create, maintain and manage virtual resources for yourself.

Now, if this is for the organization, this is called a `Private Cloud Computing`. But if this is done for the public that anybody can sign up to the cloud provider with just their card, then that is called `Public Cloud Computing`. 

`AWS`, `Azure`, `Google Cloud` are some of the big names in the public cloud computing environment.

In this course, we will be using AWS cloud computing. And let's see what AWS has to say about cloud computing.

According to AWS, Cloud Computing is on demand delivery of IT resources over the Internet with pay as you go pricing.

So you don't need to procure hardware, you can access any computing power, storage or databases from cloud provider like `AWS`.

### So who is using cloud computing?

Well, in today's time, more than 90% of the organizations are using cloud computing. And of course, they will use because there are a lot of benefits of using cloud computing, starting with 

1. `Agility`: it's very easy and quick to get started with cloud computing. You just need your card details, and you can sign up with AWS and start creating your compute resources.

2. `Elasticity`: you can grow or shrink your resources whenever you want and how much ever you need.

3. `Cost Saving`: ofcourse, if you can grow and shrink your resource as per your need, you also have control over the cost. And the big part which most of the people are missing.

4. `You can go global in minutes`: If you have a global audience, then you can use the cloud providers global data centers, and serve your global audience.

### Types of cloud computing.

In this course, we will be using different services of AWS cloud that may fall under this bracket.

1. `Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS)`: So far I was talking about virtual machines, and if you have virtual machines, you need to manage the operating system of that virtual machine, `EC2` service of AWS. is an example of IaaS.

2. `Platform as a Service (PaaS): when you don't need to worry about the virtualized platform also. You just select your platform, for example, you need an `Oracle database`, you don't need to create a virtual machine, you can use `AWS RDS Service`, and AWS will do everything for you to provision your Oracle database. 

3. `Software as a Service (SaaS)`: much, much easier, just subscribe and start using them.

So we will be seeing all these three kinds of services from AWS. So join me in the next lecture and see for yourself what is cloud computing.


