# INTRODUCTION

Hello and welcome to the AWS sessions. In this video, we're going to talk about AWS in general, its infrastructure, how it is spread across the world, and how we can leverage that to create our infrastructure.

You will need an AWS free tier account, which we have already covered how to do it in prerequisites video. 

So AWS is the biggest cloud computing provider today, with more than 46 percent market share, as we're speaking right now, and it may grow or go less, that depends on the future, but until this time, it's the biggest public cloud computing provider.

And for that reason, AWS is spread across the world, across the globe. It has its presence in so many countries, which is called as `regions`, and it's every day growing . 

Within these regions, AWS has multiple zones. Think of zones as multiple data centers. One zone is multiple data center. And in a region, you may have minimum two zones and maximum, I have seen six zones and a single zone means multiple data centers, clustered data centers. So it's huge.

## AWS GLOBAL INFRASTRUCTURE 

- AWS claims that global infrastructure is the most secure, extensive and reliable cloud platform, and currently, as I'm speaking in December 2020, it has 175 fully featured services. That's too many services.

  I'll go through the services, not all of them. But I will help you understand how these services are distributed for different categories.

- It has 77 availability zones with 24 geographic regions, so as I told you, you have zones in a region. So one region will have minimum two zones and a single zone is a multiple cluster data centers. So total 77 availability zones, and this is in December 2020. And it has announced plans for 15 more availability zones, five more AWS regions. One new region is coming up in Hyderabad, and then you have Indonesia, Japan, Spain, Switzerland.

    There are new data centers that are coming up on new regions we can see. So it can be best understood by looking at the entire globe.

    So if you visit the site `https://infrastructure.aws`, you will see the globe and `SEE HOW WE DO IT`. So you can use your cursor and rotate the entire globe, you can see, as I told you, Hyderabad is an upcoming region. And you should see its presence, it's in Bahrain, Europe, so many countries. These are the regions we are seeing mostly, so we click on the `Region`, it will tell you what region is, you click on `Availability Zone`, and it will show you some sample and tell you what is an availability zone, the data centers, so you can see you can read about it, you know, one availablty Zone will have many, many data centres in it and how it is now secure and the surveillance and the uptime, all of that.

    Along with that, with a regions and zone, it will also have `Local Zones`. So these are the new types of data centers from AWS, which will place compute storage database and some other services closer to a large population, like in a big city where there are lot of customers. 

    Then you have `Point of Presence`, which are also the edge location, so it is going to cache. This is for the AWS content delivery network where it is going to cache the data which will be used by the users. It's a very small data centers compared to the availability zones.

    Then you have `Ground Stations` and you have `Network` and you can see all of that.

- `High Availability Through Multiple Availability Zones`: So if you want to understand how those regions and zones really work, so if you have multiple zones,you can do high availability for your infrastructure. You can, let's say place 2 webserver in one zone and other 2 in the other zones. So if you have total 4 Webster, you can distribute them to get high availability. Even if a zone goes down or if it becomes slow, then other part of your infrastructure will still be up and running.

- `Improving Continuity With Replication Between Regions`: We have multiple regions you can cater global audience and you can also set a disaster recovery, and this is not a feature that you can just enable, you have to do a lot of things when you are doing a disaster recovery in between two regions.

- `Meeting Compliances and Data Residence Requirements`: Also, when you're running a project, It will have compliances right, about the data residency, security and other compliance, so those things should be fitting in with the AWS compliance, and for that reason also you have regions at different, different countries.

- `Geographic Expansion`: ofcourse, when you are expanding your business, you can use the AWA global infrastructure, you don't have to build your data centers around the world.

### AVAILABILITY ZONES

So availability zone, as I said, you can have multiple availability zone and you can distribute your infrastructure among multiple availability zones in a region to get high availability.

- So, for an example, if you're launching a virtual machine, which we call it as `instance` in AWS, you need a place, you can select the availability zone or you can let AWS decides the availability zone for you.

- If you distribute your instance across multiple availability zones and one instance fails, you can design your application so that an instance in another availability zone can handle request 

So that's some overall theory on AWS regions and zones and its edge locations, let see AWS console.

So login into the AWS management console with an IAM user. And when I said AWS has 175 fully featured services and you can see them over here, there are so many services, and under each service, we have many more services, but really don't get scared by looking at the number of services, you don't have to learn all of them. It's based on what area you're working in, where is your expertise, based on that, you will be using a particular service. Like, for example, if you are a system admin or a devops, you want a virtual machine, you can use `EC2` service.

But then there is a `Quantum Technology Amazon Bracket`, you may not need to learn that, or `Media Services`,we also have sources in `Machine Learning`,`Analytics`, `Blockchain` or `Robotics` or `IoT`. So there are many sections, based on the user requirement, AWS is catering the right service for a particular user.

Our focus in the course will be on `sysops` and `devops` services and also some developer services. Like we are going to see `EC2`, `Beanstalk`, which is more related to devops, `Storage`, `S3`, `EFS`, `Glacier`, `Database` services like `RDS` and also `ElasticCache`. Then there are services for `Migration & Transfer`. We are also going to see some networking services like `VPC`, `CloudFront`, `Route53` also will be seeing `Developer Tools` like `CodeComit`, `CodeArtifact`, `Code Build`,  `CodeDeploy`, `CodePipeline`.

So based on our requirement, as I said, we are going to focus more on sysOps and devops services, we will be also seeing monitoring services like `CloudWatch` and also some compliance services.

I think sysops gives you a very solid ground on AWS services based on that, you can learn then most of the other services in AWS, which will be very easy. If you have good hands on the sysops services of AWS, then you should be able to learn the devops services, the developer services, security services, networking services. Again, the path is based on your requirement.

At the top right, we have the regions. So in a project, you can decide based on the requirement or you will already told to use a particular region or a few regions to use. So when you select a particular region e.g North California, it will be using the zones in North California region. So whatever data I am storing over here, will be going to North California data centers. 

But if for some compliance reason, you don't want to keep it in US, you can probably go to European regions, or to cater your audience based on their geographic location.

So for this course, I will be mostly using US based region. You are free to choose any other region. I still recommend you use US based region because some other regions like Singapore, Mumbai, Tokyo, are expensive compared to US region.

Not that we will be spending money too much on AWS, we will be using Free-tier mostly, but there are certain places where we have to go above free-tier and spend some money on AWS services. And when that time comes, I'm going to alert you and will show you also how to clean up once you're done so you don't spend too much money.

So that is all in this video. I will see you in the next one where we actually do something nice.




