Hello and welcome.

We're going to first learn `EC2` service in AWS. `Ec2` is one of the most popular service of AWS Its long form is `Elastic Compute Cloud`.

This service is basically about virtual machines and the related services.

## EC2 FEATURES

1. Ec2 provides you Web services for managing and provisioning virtual machines inside Amazon Cloud or Amazon's data centers.

2. You can easily scale up or scale down your resource in ec2.

    For example, if you have 8GB of RAM, you can go from 8GB to 16GB or can even scale down from 8GB to 4GB. That's just one example on the RAM part. Then you have CPU network and storage, other features that you can scale up and scale down. So it's elastic in nature.

3. You  pay only for what you're using or how much you're using. There are different pricing model on that.


4. Ec2 service can be integrated with other services like S3, EFS, RDS, DynamoDB and Lambda, and many other services.

## EC2 PRICING

1. `On Demand`

    Pay per hour or seconds. This we will be using throughout our course. And we are really not going to pay for it all the time. We are going to use free tier. But `On Demand` is pay per hour.

    So if you launch an EC2 instance, a virtual machine, you will be paying hourly basis or seconds sometimes. 

2. `Reserved`
    
    Here you can reserve the capacity for 1 to 3 years and on which you get discounts.

3. `Spot`

     Here you can bid on the unused EC2 resources and get huge discounts on that. 

    But the problem with this is if someone outbids you, your EC2 instance will be gone, but then you use it in the mixture of auto scaling group and all, and this will save you a lot of money.

4. `Dedicated hosts`

    Physical server dedicated for you.

    If you don't want to go with the virtual machine, you can dedicate a complete physical server for yourself, which will be very expensive.

We will be doing on demand and in course we'll be using the free tier.

## COMPONENTS OF EC2 SERVICE

1. To launch an EC2 instance, primarily, you need an `AMI`, `Amazon Machine Image`.

    `AMI` provides information to launch an instance, which is a virtual server in the cloud. This is a ready made virtual machine like vagrant, we have seen vagrant boxes here we have AMI and you have a huge list to choose from.

2. When you launch an instance, the instance type you specify determine the hardware of the host computer used for your instance.

    This include the size of the compute resource, how much amount of CPU, RAM, Network speed or storage speed. So you will have a huge variety to choose from. We'll go through them.

3. Amazon EC2 service provides you with flexible, cost effective and easy-to-use data storage options for your instance.

    `EBS` Elastic BLOCK Store. This will be the storage. So on AMI we primarily have a storage like 8GB for Linux machine and 30GB for Windows Machine. And then you have different sizes of AMI that will be using the EBS service and you can choose and add your own storage also, which will be seing in the next session.

    Also to mention EBS is the virtual hard disks on which you can store your operating system and also store your data.

4. `Tags`: Tag is a simple label consisting of a customer-defined-key and an optional value that can make it easier to manage search and filter resources.

    To every resource in AWS. You can use simple key-value pairs and define tags like name of an EC2 instance, the project, the customer who owns this or the environment. You can set as many as tags you want. It is very good for filtering and also for billing.

5. `Security Group`: Security group you will have on every EC2 instance. This is basically a firewall for inbound and outbound traffic.

6. Amazon EC2 uses public-key cryptography to encrypt and decrypt login information.

    To log in to an ec2 instance, you will need a key pair. 

    For Linux machine, these are basically, ssh log in keys, the public and private key as we have seen in bash scripting. So you just create a key, download it for yourself, the public key will be injected in the instance so you can use it to log in to your EC2 instance. 

    For Linux machine, you can use the key to do an SSH, for Windows machine, you will use the key to generate the password.

## CREATION OF EC2 INSTANCE 

Creating an EC2 instant is very easy. We're going to see that next. It's basically wizard based.

- So you choose what AMI you want

- You select the instance type and then there'll be some configuration for the instance, like network, it's permission and some scripts to execute.

- After that you will decide on the storage. This is where EBS comes in. You can add extra storage if you want or you can go with the default AMI storage.

- Then you select the tags, what tags you want. You can give key value pairs and do as much as tagging you want.

- Then you create or select a security group which is a firewall.

- Finally, you review the instance, choose a login key, and the instance gets created.

So let's take a quick view of how we're going to create an ec2 instance now.


