# CLOUDWATCH INTRODUCTION 

Welcome to the cloud watch session.

AWS Cloud Watch is a monitoring service. But now it has expanded to much more than that. It's also a logging solution, and also there are events, log in sites and so many other amazing feature that Cloud Watch provides.

But primarily 

- Cloudwatch is a service that will be monitoring performance of your AWS environment.

    So in a region, if you if you're using any service, it will create standard metrics for it. In other monitoring tool, these things are called `Checks`, ike for a virtual machine, CPU utilization or disk utilization or network utilization.

    So for every service, cloudwatch is going to provide some standard metrics So you really don't need to set up monitoring. Monitoring is anyways set up through Cloud Watch, by default there's a monitoring set up.

    If you want, you can make changes, you can add more metrics of your choice, which are called `Custom metrics`, and then on those metrics, you can set alarms notifications.

- Metrics: AWS Cloudwatch allowa you to record metrics for services such as EBS, EC2, ELB, Route53 Health checks, RDS Amazon S3, CloudFront etc

    So metrics is the primary thing in the cloud watch. So if you use EBS volume, you should see some metrics for EBS volume. If you're using EC2, you should see some metrics. So if you go to EC2 instance, an EC2 instance will have a `Monitoring` tab, and these metrics are coming from cloud watch. So you have CPU utilization, and currently there is no data available because it's going to take some time to collect the metrics, and then you should see the graphs.

    So `CPU utilization`, `Status checks`, `Network in`, `Network Out`, `Network packets in`, `Network packets out`, `Disk read`, `Disk read operations`, `Disk write` and `Disk write operations`. These are the common metrics that you will see or standard metrics that you will see in all the EC2 instance.

    Likewise, if you go to `Volume` section, volume will also have monitoring and there will be metrics for volumes as well, `Read bandwidth`, `Write bandwidth`, `Read throughput`, `Write throughput`. So you take any service that you're using in your AWS account, it will have metrics which will be set by Cloud Watch.

- Events: AWS events will give you a real time stream of any events that is happening.

    For example, you launching an instance or Terminating or taking a snapshot or creating a volume, these are events and cloud watch is going to capture all the events. 

    What can you do with those events? Well, you can set triggers from those events. Mostly it's used to integrate with lambda functions.

- Logs: You can use Amazon CloudWatch Logs to monitor, store and access your log files from Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud (Amazon EC2) instances, AWS Cloud trail, Route 53, and other resources.

    Almost all the services will have an option to stream the logs. In ec2 you don't have a direct option. You can set it from your operating system. From your operating system, you can set an agent which can stream logs to cloud watch service. And about these logs and events, we're going to see this in AWS part two.

In this video, we'll be just focusing on metrics.

### So what we do with the metrics?

- We set alarms on them.

    If you really want to monitor the activity, you cant be looking at the graphs of cloud watch 24/7. But if something goes wrong, if the graph is spiking high, you should get some notifications. So alarms will help set you notifications. So alarms can be integrated with SNS service to send email notification.

    Simple Notification Service (Amazon SNS) is a web services that coordinate and manages the delivery or sending of messages to subscribing endpoints or clients. 

    So we can say if the CPU utilization is crossing above 60. I should receive an email notification. That we will see how to do.

    We have an ec2 instance cloudwatch is collecting metrics of that instance. We're going to set alarm on that metrics. We are going to say if my CPU utilization reaches a certain level, then it should trigger an email notification.

    So there are three services in play over here, `Ec2 instance` that is generating the metrics, `Cloudwatch` which is collecting the metrics, and we are setting alarms in the cloud watch and then the `SNS service`.

So Ec2, CloudWatch and SNS in this example we are going to see together, for CPU utilization e-mail notification.

In the second part of the AWS, we will also he seeing how to how to collect logs from the EC2 instance and set metrics on the logs. And then based on that, you can send email notification or you can do some other stuff as well.

We'll be seeing that in the next part of AWS.

So as of now. We'll be seeing CPU utilization e-mail notification. So let's get into action.


