# AUTOSCALING GROUP INTRODUCTION

Welcome to the auto scaling section of AWS.

This is really a very pretty easy service to understand if you know ec2, if you know cloud watch, then it would be very easy for you to understand, which we have already done in the previous sessions.

`Auto scaling` is a service that automatically monitors and adjusts compute resources to maintain performance for applications hosted in AWS

So auto scale groups service integrates with Cloud Watch and it will monitor your resources on a particular metric that you have selected, like CPU utilization. And if the CPU utilization, for example, is going high, crossing the threshold, it can adjust the capacity. It can add more instances in your auto scaling group. And this is based on the cloud watch alarms.

So while we are creating auto scaling group, we also have to create cloud watch alarms to add the capacity or also to remove the capacity, adding the capacity to maintain the performance and remove the capacity to maintain our cost.

So auto scaling group is going to use `launch configuration` or `launch template`, yes the same launch template we have seen in the EC2 tor the elb exercise.

`Launch configuration/Template` is an instance configuration template that an auto scaling group uses to launch EC2 instances.

It can use those launch template or launch configuration to launch your instances in the auto scaling group. So the instance launch information will be provided by launch configuration on launch template 

To adjust the capacity based on the alarm, it uses `scaling policies`.

`Scaling policies` is used to increase or decrease the number of running instances in the group dynamically to meet changing conditions.

Auto scaling group has its own policies, or you can set policies yourself, step scaling, like, for example, if the CPU is going high more than 60, you can mention that launch, 2 instance, if it's going to 80, launch, 4 instance, or if it's coming down, then remove 2, 3, 4 as per your requirement. Or you can let auto scaling group handle all that for you.

When you you're creating auto scaling group, you can mention the minimum size of your auto scaling group. So for example, you can say, one is the minimum instance that I need in the auto scaling group. And you can mentioned the desired capacity. So when you say desired capacity is two and minimum is one, it will create two instances in your auto scaling group. And if you're wondering what is minimum, then as the name says, you cannot remove that last instance from your auto scaling group, if you said one. So auto scaling group based on its scaling policy will also terminate the instance, but it cannot terminate the minimum size and desired capacity will be the usual running instances.

Then you can also mention the maximum size based on the scaling policy. If it starts adding the instances, how much maximum instances it can add, if you said 4, then it will not launch more than 4 instance, in an auto scaling group, to maintain your cost.

So let's see the design. So we'll create an auto scaling group which will be powered by your launch configuration to launch instances. So you see that rectangle in the auto scaling group that will be your launch configuration. And based on the Load, let's say, CPU utilization, you have said in the metric. Alarm will be triggered if it crosses the threshold and scaling policies will trigger the launch of new instances in the auto scaling group or can even reduce the instances based on your scaling policies.

Now, let's see how it can be done. Let's get into action.


